Historically, matter has typically been conceived of as something hard and solid: a particle of some form or another. Here, we see that we can produce many of the known properties of matter using a very simple extension of the simple second-order wave equation that we've explored in the prior chapters. The simplicity and elegance of this matter wave in explaining a very wide range of physical phenomena, including Newtonian and relativistic equations of motion, the Lorentz transformations of special relativity, and the quantum mechanical relationship between wave frequency and velocity (momentum), provides a compelling overall framework for thinking of matter in terms of waves. This then provides the core idea behind the WELD framework.

In this chapter, we take the first fundamental step in developing a matter wave equation, which results in the **Klein-Gordon** equation, that operates on a scalar wave field just like the simple second-order wave equation. Although this basic equation contains so many fundamental properties, it also has some important limitations in terms of capturing the full range of behavior of a "particle" such as an electron. First, it does not produce a **conserved charge density** value over time --- charge will not remain strictly constant over time under this equation. Second, it fails to capture the important property of **spin**, which we will see plays an important role in the behavior of an electron. These limitations can be addressed in a couple of extensions to the Klein-Gordon equation, which result in the **Dirac equation**, as developed in the [next chapter](ch05_dirac.md).

# Problems with Particles

First, let's consider for a moment the possibility that, within our cellular automaton system, matter is composed in some way of particles. How natural or easy is it to get that to work? It turns out, it is not very natural or easy at all, for much the same reason that purely binary or discrete states are not particularly natural in the CA system. Specifically, the most obvious way of introducing a particle in this system is to imagine that it is a discrete binary state value in a cubic cell. For all locations where there are no particles, this state value is 0, and where there are particles, it is 1. The problem is, how do these particles move? They can only make discrete jumps to one of the 26 neighboring cells. How can they exhibit trajectories of motion that are not along one of these 26 directions? How can they take on different velocities? They would have to wait in one spot for a while, then make a discrete jump, etc, with the ratio of waiting to jumping corresponding to velocity. But what provides the "memory" for how long to wait before jumping, and what direction to jump to? In more technical terms, what provides the momentum representation for such a particle?

Another important problem with the particle model is that it introduces complications for force fields very near the particle itself. Both the electromagnetic and gravitational forces follow a $1/r^2$ law, which means that the strength of these forces in the cells immediately adjacent to a discrete particle would be very strong, especially for the much stronger electromagnetic force. This is problematic because such a strong level of force corresponds to a very high energy density, which can end up producing unexpected physics. For example, high energies can spontaneously create new massive particles. A wave-like distributed particle model would avoid such problems, by distributing the source of such forces over a much wider area, and greatly reducing the charge and mass density per unit cube.

Some of these problems may be surmountable, but the level of complexity and mechanism required to do it is daunting. For example, I have implemented a system for solving the particle motion problem, but it is truly baroque in its complexity and implausibility. Again, we cannot place strong a priori constraints on what happens at the most fundamental level, so it could be that particles of this sort exist. But perhaps we should pursue the wave alternative first, to see if something more natural emerges. Indeed, we'll see in a moment that a single modification to the basic wave equation produces a surprisingly comprehensive description of matter (while still falling short of describing actual physics). The resulting model is so simple, elegant, and consistent with known physics that we do not hesitate to completely abandon the discrete particle model, with all of its difficulties and complexity.


To summarize our progress so far, we have seen that in the domain of forces, the electromagnetic field can be understood in terms of four wave equations operating in parallel, driven by the charge density and charge current density. In the domain of matter, the Klein-Gordon wave equation allows us to describe particles having the following properties:

- Motion at continuously variable speeds, in all directions (without asymmetries caused by the underlying grid matrix).
- Newtonian (classical) physics (law of inertia, law of force) (in the limit of small velocities relative to the speed of light). This means that our model can explain virtually all of the intuitive everyday phenomena of physics (e.g., billiard balls and cars moving and everything that doesn't require gravity to explain).
- Many aspects of quantum mechanics (e.g., momentum proportional to wave frequency), by virtue of the KG equation being the relativistic version of Schrodinger's equation.
- Special relativity (Lorentz contraction, time dilation, mass inflation), which can be understood mechanistically in terms of the properties of KG waves as they move at increasingly faster speeds (higher frequency = shorter wavelength = space contraction, etc), and abstractly in terms of the KG equation satisfying the relativistic energy Hamiltonian.

Again, we see that an astounding swath of fundamental physics emerges from an exceedingly simple system, which is very nearly the simplest version of a continuous cellular automaton that does anything interesting at all. We simply added one additional term to the basic wave equation (the "mass drag" term), and from that follows so many central features of our reality. Again, one is left with the strong feeling that there must be something to this: the ratio of important stuff explained to assumptions made is exceedingly high.

This ratio is critical. You can think of it as "bang for the buck", and scientists are extremely frugal shoppers, in these terms. Assumptions are costly, and the fewer of them you can make to explain the same amount of stuff, the better. Here, we have made an extremely small set of basic, strongly-motivated assumptions, and wound up with almost every major feature of known physics! The most important missing part is gravitation, but we'll get to that later.

Interestingly, this is somewhat of a high-water mark in this respect, in that the subsequent developments of our model will largely result in increases in complexity that produce apparently relatively minor additional explanatory benefit. However, there is good reason to believe that many of the complex and beautiful phenomena of our universe could not exist without these extra degrees of complexity: the basic EM wave and KG equations do a huge amount, and are a very solid foundation, but they fall short of capturing important things like charge, and the interaction between charges via the electromagnetic field. As they say, the devil is in the details, and our current model is just a bit to smooth and simple to provide sufficiently complex dynamics to support beings like us, to sit here and ponder it all. In any case, the other thing scientists care a lot about is actually explaining the known data, and without these extra additions, the model simply does not.

Another important milestone that we've reached here is the contemplation of what it would require to have discrete particles in our system. They just do not work. In contrast to our wave equations, particles introduce massive amounts of complexity without adding much of any unexpected benefits. Therefore, we are entirely prepared at this point to discard the notion of a discrete particle entirely. The implications of such a move will reverberate throughout the rest of the paper.

Overall, it is interesting to compare our strong enthusiasm for the KG equation with its almost total neglect in the physics literature, which instead has been dominated by Schrodinger's equation and the Dirac equation that we'll encounter later. We like the KG equation because it is extremely simple and elegant from the perspective of our cellular automaton model, and its second-order nature both emerges naturally out of this framework, and solves a number of important problems (e.g., symmetric propagation in all directions, which does not occur in a first-order wave equation in the CA framework). In contrast, the rest of physics likes Schrodinger's equation because it is more analytically tractable as a first-order equation. It is linear, and it also automatically produces a positive-valued conserved probability density, which fits perfectly with the standard probabilistic interpretation of quantum physics. The fact that it violates special relativity is often overlooked, and anyway the Dirac equation solves that problem, while staying within a first-order framework (but at the cost of introducing 8 state variables interacting in a fairly complex way). Thus, the overall difference is one of "mechanism" vs. "analysis," where standard physics is strongly weighted toward analysis. Nevertheless, we'll see that with appropriate further developments, a version of the KG equation can provide a correct explanation of all the phenomena covered by the Dirac equation.

